[DOCS-13738] Update Plan and Launch Experiments page (#35778)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/experiments/plan_and_launch_experiments.md

Reviewer: Subject type isn't for grouping users. It is the level at which you are randomizing. Data is grouped by subject type 

Recommended change:
> - A [subject type][6] specifying the level at which your experiment is randomized (default is **User**).

---
title: Plan and Launch Experiments
description: Use Datadog Experiments to measure the causal relationship that new experiences or features have on business outcomes, user behavior, and application performance.
aliases:
  - /product_analytics/experimentation/
further_reading:
- link: "https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/datadog-product-analytics"
  tag: "Blog"
  text: "Make data-driven design decisions with Product Analytics"
---

## Overview

Plan and launch [experiments][8] to measure how new features affect business outcomes, user behavior, and application performance.

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, make sure you have:

- A [feature flag][4] for deploying and managing the experiment variants you want to test.
- At least one [experiment metric][2] for measuring the outcome of your experiment.

> - A [subject type][6] for grouping users (default is **User**).

Author: **Note**: this links to the UI, but I will add a glossary term for this and then add a tooltip. These changes will be in a different PR.

## Plan your experiment
Give your experiment a name and hypothesis, then define the settings.

### Draft your experiment

To create a draft experiment:

> 

Author: **Note**: Please use the Demo account as org 2 has a different UI.

You can also create an experiment directly from a feature flag's detail page:
1. Navigate to the **[Feature Flags][7]** page and select the **Overview** tab.
1. Select the feature flag you want to use for your experiment to open its detail page.
1. In the **Targeting rules & rollouts** section, click **Create New Experiment**, then **Create Experiment**.

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_plan_launch_ff_new_experiment.png" alt="The feature flag detail page for a flag called new_product_photos, showing targeting rules and rollouts with a 50/50 split between control and treatment variants, and a Create New Experiment button highlighted at the bottom." style="width:80%;" >}}

### Set up your experiment

After drafting your experiment, define the metrics, feature flag, and randomization settings.

#### Set decision metrics
Define the metrics that measure the outcome of your experiment.

1. Use the **Calculate metrics by** dropdown to select the subject type. The default is **User (@usr.id)**. To define a custom subject type, click **Create subject type** from the dropdown.

> 1. Click the **Primary metric** button to open the metric picker:

Author: **Note**: added button here on purpose to differentiate between the button and the name of the section that shares the same name. I avoided using the "+" as a differentiator for consistency throughout the doc.

   1. Select a primary metric to measure the main outcome of your experiment.
   1. (Optional) Scope the list to **Certified** or **Non-certified** metrics.
   1. (Optional) Click **Create Metric** to define a new metric. For setup instructions, see [Create Experiment Metrics][2].
1. (Optional) Add **Secondary metrics** to monitor unintended effects of the experiment on other areas like performance, engagement, or revenue.
1. Proceed to [Run a sample size calculation (optional)](#run-a-sample-size-calculation-optional) or skip to [Add a feature flag](#add-a-feature-flag).

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_plan_launch_decision_metric.png" alt="The experiment configuration page showing the Decision metrics section with a Calculate metrics by dropdown set to User (@usr.id), a primary metric set to Add to Cart Conversion, and a Secondary metrics section." style="width:80%;" >}}

#### Run a sample size calculation (optional)
Estimate the sample size needed to detect meaningful differences between variants.

> 

Author: **Note**: the link is lowercase **sample size calculator** and the panel is uppercase **Sample Size Calculator**. I matched the UI in this case per previous recommendation, but happy to adjust as needed. 

I can also change the last step to read: 
> Close the side panel and continue to [Add a feature flag](#add-a-feature-flag).

Thanks for your insight.

1. Click the **sample size calculator** link to open the side panel.
1. Expand **Calculation details**. Your primary and secondary metrics appear under **Metrics**.
1. Use the **Entry point** dropdown to select the event that assigns users to the experiment. Datadog uses this to estimate expected traffic.

> 1. (Optional) Add a **Filter** to narrow the entry point's audience. If you do not see the property you need, type the property name in the **Custom property** field and click **Add**.

Author: **Note:** I debated adding "Optional" here since the header already has it. But I kept it since it is in the UI.

1. Set the **Number of variants** (default is 2) and **Traffic exposure** percentage (default is 100%).
1. Under **Additional inputs**, configure the statistical **Power** (default is 80%) and **Target experiment duration** in weeks.
1. Click **Run Calculation** to see an estimate of the **[Minimum detectable effect (MDE)][3] over time** for your metrics.
1. Close the **Sample Size Calculator** side panel and continue to [Add a feature flag](#add-a-feature-flag).

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_plan_launch_sample_size.png" alt="The Sample Size Calculator side panel showing calculation details with Add to Cart Conversion as the primary metric and Number of cart views as a guardrail, an entry point set to click on ADD TO CART, two variants at 100% traffic exposure, and additional inputs for power and target experiment duration." style="width:80%;" >}}

#### Add a feature flag
Link a feature flag to control how traffic is split between the experiment variants.

> 1. Click the **Add a feature flag** button to open the picker.

Author: **Note**: added button here on purpose to differentiate between the button and the name of the section that shares the same name. I avoided using the "+" as a differentiator for consistency throughout the doc.

1. Select the feature flag you want to use for your experiment.
1. If you have not created a feature flag, click **Create New Feature Flag**. For setup instructions, see [Create your first feature flag][4].
1. Continue to [randomize your users and set traffic exposure](#configure-randomization).

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_plan_launch_add_ff.png" alt="The feature flag picker showing a list of available flags sorted by creation date, with new_product_photos selected and its details displayed, including the flag key new-product-photos, type Boolean, and a Create New Feature Flag link at the bottom." style="width:80%;" >}}

#### Configure randomization
Randomize your users and split traffic across your experiment variants.

After you select a feature flag, Datadog pre-populates the randomization settings based on the flag's configuration.

> <div class="alert alert-info">The randomization settings you configure here have the following effect when you launch your experiment:<br><br><ul><li>Datadog adds a targeting rule to the selected feature flag.</li><li>If multiple experiments share the same flag, Datadog evaluates traffic based on the order of the flag's targeting rules. You can reorder targeting rules in the confirmation modal before launching.</li></ul></div>

Author: **Note**: I used "confirmation dialog" here instead of "the Confirm starting the experiment dialog" because they have not seen it yet for me to include the full name.

Happy to adjust if you think otherwise.

- link: "https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/datadog-product-analytics"
  tag: "Blog"
  text: "Make data-driven design decisions with Product Analytics"
- link: "/experiments/reading_results"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Read Experiment Results"
---

## Overview

Plan and launch experiments to measure how new features affect user outcomes.

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, make sure you have:

> - A [feature flag][4] for deploying and managing the experiment groups you want to test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A [feature flag][4] for deploying and managing the experiment variants you want to test.
```

1. Click **Create Draft Experiment** to open the experiment's setup page.

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_plan_launch_create_experiment.png" alt="The Create new draft experiment dialog with an experiment name of New Product Photos Experiment, a hypothesis about higher-resolution product photos increasing add-to-cart conversions, and a Create Draft Experiment button highlighted." style="width:80%;" >}}

You can also create an experiment directly from a feature flag's detail page:
1. Navigate to the **[Feature Flags][7]** page.
1. Select the appropriate feature flag to open its detail page.
1. In the **Targeting rules & rollouts** section, click **Create New Experiment**, then **Create Experiment**.

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_plan_launch_ff_new_experiment.png" alt="The feature flag detail page for a flag called new_product_photos, showing targeting rules and rollouts with a 50/50 split between control and treatment variants, and a Create New Experiment button highlighted at the bottom." style="width:80%;" >}}

### Set up your experiment

After drafting your experiment, define the metrics, feature flag, and randomization settings.

> <div class="alert alert-warning">You can edit only the subject type after launching your experiment. You cannot change the other settings after you launch.</div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You should be able to update all settings after launching (e.g., notifications, stats settings, explore dimensions)

Author: Got it! I only saw the subject type edit at the top here. 
<img width="1333" height="681" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/29a236de-3818-454b-af35-80af125f53e1" />

But it seems each section has their own edit/ configure button. 
<img width="452" height="282" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3b153b62-320f-4823-9412-86cebd5a7fa2" />

Thanks for clarifying. I will make a note it in the doc.

#### Decision metrics
Define the metrics that measure the outcome of your experiment.

1. Use the **Calculate metrics by** dropdown to select the {{< tooltip text="subject type" tooltip="A subject type is the unit that Datadog randomizes for the experiment.">}}. The default is **User (@usr.id)**. To define a custom subject type, click **+ Create subject type** from the dropdown.
1. Click the **Primary metric** button to open the metric picker:

>    1. Select a primary metric to measure the main outcome (your hypothesis) of your experiment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. Select a primary metric to measure the main outcome of your experiment (typically from your hypothesis).
```

Author: Got it!
It seems "hypothesis" may not be needed given your edit.
I'll keep it to: **Select a primary metric to measure the main outcome of your experiment.**

1. (Optional) Under **Additional inputs**, configure the statistical **Power** (default 80%) and **Target experiment duration** in weeks.
1. Click **Run Calculation** to see an estimate of the **[Minimum detectable effect (MDE)][3] over time** for your metrics.
1. Close the **Sample Size Calculator** side panel.

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_plan_launch_sample_size.png" alt="The Sample Size Calculator side panel showing calculation details with Add to Cart Conversion as the primary metric and Number of cart views as a guardrail, an entry point set to click on ADD TO CART, two variants at 100% traffic exposure, and additional inputs for power and target experiment duration." style="width:80%;" >}}

#### Feature flag
Link a feature flag to control how traffic is split between the experiment variants.

1. Click the **Add a feature flag** button to open the picker.
1. Select the appropriate feature flag for your experiment.
1. If you have not created a feature flag, click **Create New Feature Flag**.

#### Randomization
After you select a feature flag, the randomization settings are pre-populated based on the flag's configuration.

> <div class="alert alert-info">Experiment randomization settings do not affect the linked feature flag until you launch.<br><br>When you launch your experiment, Datadog adds a targeting rule to the flag that assigns users to variants and activates randomization.<br><br>If multiple experiments share the same flag, Datadog evaluates traffic based on the order of experiments in the flag's targeting waterfall. You can reorder experiments in the confirmation modal before launching.</div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-info">Experiment randomization settings do not affect the linked feature flag until you launch.<br><br>When you launch your experiment, Datadog adds a targeting rule to the flag that randomly assigns users to variants via deterministic hashing.<br><br>If multiple experiments share the same flag, Datadog evaluates traffic based on the order of experiments in the flag's targeting waterfall. You can reorder experiments in the confirmation modal before launching.</div>
```

I'm flexible on adding the part about 'deterministic hashing', but I think it's useful to make it clear that the same user will continue to see the same variant

- link: "https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/datadog-product-analytics"
  tag: "Blog"
  text: "Make data-driven design decisions with Product Analytics"
---

## Overview

Plan and launch [experiments][8] to measure how new features affect business outcomes, user behavior, and application performance.

## Prerequisites

> 

Author: **Note**: I kept the permissions callout vague (referencing Product Analytics and Feature Flags areas rather than specific permission names) to stay consistent with the existing metrics page pattern and accommodate orgs using custom roles where specific names may vary.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense. Do you think it's too pedantic to broaden the statement to apply to default roles also? Not sure how common Read-Only default role assignment is.

Author: Good call — broadened the callout to drop the "custom roles" qualifier so it covers default roles like Read-Only too.

1. Select the feature flag you want to use for your experiment to open its detail page.
1. In the **Targeting rules & rollouts** section, click **Create New Experiment** to open the dialog.
1. In the dialog, click **Create Experiment** to open the experiment's setup page.
1. On the experiment setup page, Datadog pre-fills the **Experiment name** with the name of the feature flag. Edit it as needed.
1. Enter your **Hypothesis** and continue to [Set up your experiment](#set-up-your-experiment).

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_plan_launch_ff_new_experiment.png" alt="The feature flag detail page for a flag called new_product_photos, showing targeting rules and rollouts with a 50/50 split between control and treatment variants, and a Create New Experiment button highlighted at the bottom." style="width:80%;" >}}

### Set up your experiment

After creating your experiment, define the metrics, feature flag, and randomization settings.

#### Set decision metrics

To define the metrics that measure the outcome of your experiment:

1. Use the **Calculate metrics by** dropdown to select the subject type (default is **User (@usr.id)**).

>    - To define a custom subject type, click **Create subject type** from the dropdown.

Author: **Note**: I added "button" here on purpose to differentiate between the button and the name of the section. I avoided using the "+" as a differentiator for consistency throughout the doc. Thanks for any insights.

1. Expand **Additional inputs**, then choose the statistical **Power** (default is 80%) and enter a **Target experiment duration** in weeks.
   - The **Target experiment duration** value must be 1 or an even number because the calculator projects MDE values and expected user counts at 1-, 2-, 4-, 6-, and 8-week intervals.
   - For longer intervals, enter a higher even value.
1. Click **Run Calculation** to see an estimate of the **[Minimum detectable effect (MDE)][3] over time** for your metrics.
1. Close the side panel and continue to [Add a feature flag](#add-a-feature-flag).

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_plan_launch_sample_size.png" alt="The Sample Size Calculator side panel showing calculation details with Add to Cart Conversion as the primary metric and Number of cart views as a secondary metric (guardrail), an entry point set to click on ADD TO CART, two variants at 100% traffic exposure, and additional inputs for power and target experiment duration." style="width:80%;" >}}

#### Add a feature flag

To add a feature flag to control how Datadog splits traffic between the experiment variants:

> 1. In the **Feature flag** section, click the **Add a feature flag** button to open the picker.

Author: **Note**: I used "button" here to remain consistent on the page. See note above about [the primary and secondary metrics](https://github.com/DataDog/documentation/pull/35778/changes#r3124801245).

#### Run a sample size calculation (optional)

The sample size calculator estimates the number of users and the duration needed to detect a meaningful effect. You choose an entry point, the event that assigns users to the experiment, and Datadog uses the volume of traffic to that event to produce the estimate.

To run the calculation:

1. In the **Run a sample size calculation (optional)** section, click the **sample size calculator** link to open the side panel.
1. Expand **Calculation details**. Your primary and secondary metrics appear under **Metrics**.
1. Use the **Entry point** dropdown to select the event that assigns users to the experiment, such as viewing a checkout page or clicking an add-to-cart button. Datadog uses this event to estimate traffic volume.
1. (Optional) Under **Filter entry point**, narrow the entry point's audience:
   1. Click **Filter** and select a property from the picker. If you do not see the property you need, type the property name in the **Custom property** field and click **Add**.
   1. In the filter row that appears, modify the operator as needed and select a value from the dropdown. The default operator is **= (is)**.

>    1. (Optional) Click **Filter** to add more rows. Between rows, use the dropdown to select **or** or **and** to set how filters combine.

Reviewer 2: Maybe "+ Filter" or "Add Filter"?

Author: Good catch, updated both instances to **+ Filter**.
Thanks for the offline convo about this, adding this to my toolbox.

1. Set the **Number of variants** (default is 2) and **Traffic exposure** percentage (default is 100%).
1. Expand **Additional inputs**, then choose the statistical **Power** (default is 80%) and enter a **Target experiment duration** in weeks.
   - The **Target experiment duration** value must be 1 or an even number because the calculator estimates MDE values and expected user counts at 1-, 2-, 4-, 6-, and 8-week intervals.

>    - For longer intervals, enter a higher even value.

Reviewer 2: You could probably remove this line as it seems self-explanatory

Author: Agreed, removed.
